pages/api-reference/channel-api.mdx, before:

---
title: "SP8D Channel API Reference: Lock-Free Messaging for JavaScript & Node.js"
description: "Comprehensive SP8D Channel API reference for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn methods, options, diagnostics, troubleshooting, and best practices for lock-free, real-time, high-performance messaging."
keywords:
  [
    "SP8D API",
    "channel API",
    "JavaScript",
    "Node.js",
    "lock-free messaging",
    "diagnostics",
    "concurrency",
    "high-performance messaging",
  ]
canonical: "https://sp8d.github.io/api-reference/channel-api"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

Access the comprehensive SP8D Channel API reference for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn methods, options, diagnostics, troubleshooting, and best practices for lock-free, real-time, high-performance messaging.

# SP8D Channel API Reference: Lock-Free Messaging for JavaScript & Node.js

> **The `Channel` API is at the heart of SP8D:** It gives you explicit, lock-free, slot-driven control over cross-thread messaging—plus direct access to real-time diagnostics, segmentation, and backpressure handling.

---

## Channel Creation

<Callout type="note" title="Quick intro">
  Create a channel for real-time, lock-free messaging. Use{" "}
  <code>createChannel</code> for new channels, <code>attachChannel</code> to
  connect in another thread.
</Callout>

### `createChannel(options): { channel, buffer }`

Creates a new SP8D channel, returning both the API object and the underlying `SharedArrayBuffer`.

**Options:**

- `slots` _(number, required)_ — Number of slots in the ring buffer.
- `slotSize` _(number, required)_ — Max size (bytes) per payload.
- `mode` _(string: "SPSC" | "MPSC" | "MPMC", optional)_ — Concurrency mode. Default: `"SPSC"`.
- `segments` _(number)_ — Segments for increased scale. Default: `1`.
- `sweepTimeoutMs` _(number)_ — Slot reclaim timeout (ms). Default: `50`.

```ts copy
const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({
  slots: 16,
  slotSize: 64,
  mode: "MPMC",
  segments: 2,
});
```

### `attachChannel(buffer: SharedArrayBuffer): Channel`

#### Use in a second thread/worker to attach to an existing channel’s buffer.

```ts copy
// In a worker thread/process
const channel = attachChannel(buffer);
```

## Channel API: Core Methods

<Callout type="info" title="How to use this section">
  Methods are grouped by intent. Each group starts with a short intro and best
  practices. Scan, deep-dive, or jump to what you need.
</Callout>

---

### Send Data

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use <code>trySend</code> in high-frequency or non-critical paths to avoid
  exceptions. Use <code>send</code> when you must guarantee delivery or want to
  catch errors.
</Callout>

#### `send(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number): boolean`

Enqueue a message. Throws if full or payload too large. Use for critical, must-succeed sends.

#### `trySend(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number): boolean`

Enqueue a message. Returns `false` if full or payload too large—never throws. Use for non-blocking, best-effort sends.

#### `sendAsync(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number, opts?): Promise<boolean>`

Waits for a slot and sends. Supports timeout and abort. Use for async, backpressure-aware flows.

```ts copy
await channel.sendAsync(msg, myProducerId, { timeoutMs: 1000 });
```

---

### Receive Data

<Callout type="tip" title="Polling vs. Async">
  Use <code>recvAsync</code> for event-driven flows, and <code>tryRecv</code>{" "}
  for polling or non-blocking loops.
</Callout>

#### `recv(): Uint8Array | null`

Synchronous receive. Returns `null` if empty. Use for polling or tight loops.

```ts copy
const next = channel.recv();
if (next) process(next);
```

#### `tryRecv(): Uint8Array | null`

Non-throwing, non-blocking receive. Returns `null` if empty.

```ts copy
const msg = channel.tryRecv();
if (msg) process(msg);
```

#### `recvAsync(): Promise<Uint8Array | null>`

Async receive. Waits for a message. Use for event-driven or awaitable flows.

```ts copy
const msg = await channel.recvAsync();
```

---

### JSON Helpers

<Callout type="warning" title="Gotcha">
  JSON helpers are for quick prototyping. For production, prefer binary
  serialization for performance and size.
</Callout>

#### `sendJSON(obj: object, producerId?: number): boolean`

Send a JSON-serializable object. Throws if full or payload too large.

#### `recvJSON(): object | null`

Receive a JSON-serialized object. Returns `null` if empty or parse fails.

---

### Channel State

<Callout type="tip" title="Status Checks">
  Use <code>full()</code> and <code>empty()</code> to check channel status
  before sending or receiving in tight loops.
</Callout>

#### `full(): boolean`

Returns `true` if the channel is full (no slots available for sending).

#### `empty(): boolean`

Returns `true` if the channel is empty (no slots available for reading).

---

### Lifecycle & Control

<Callout type="warning" title="Shutdown">
  After <code>close()</code>, all send/recv methods will throw or return falsy.
  Use <code>closeAsync</code> for graceful shutdowns in async environments.
</Callout>

#### `close(): void`

Immediately closes the channel and all internal timers. Cleans up, resets all state. After `close()`, send/recv throw or return falsy.

#### `closeAsync(): Promise<void>`

Gracefully closes the channel and waits for all background tasks to stop.

```ts copy
await channel.closeAsync();
```

#### `reset(): void`

Resets the channel to its initial state (empties all slots, resets counters). Does not reallocate the buffer.

```ts copy
channel.reset();
```

---

### Diagnostics & Introspection

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use <code>stats()</code> and <code>info()</code> for live monitoring and
  debugging. Use <code>validate()</code> in tests to catch protocol errors
  early.
</Callout>

<Callout type="info" title="Advanced: Async Iteration">
  The channel can be used as an async iterator for idiomatic, event-driven
  message consumption.
</Callout>

#### `stats(): ChannelStats`

Returns a snapshot object of channel usage and health metrics.

- `slots` — total slots
- `used` — slots in use
- `free` — slots available
- `errors, conflicts, reclaimed` — counts of errors, producer/consumer collisions, and recovery sweeps

#### `info(): string`

Returns a human-readable string of the channel’s configuration (mode, size, segments).

#### `validate(): void`

Checks protocol invariants—throws if any slot is in an illegal state. Use in development/testing, not hot production loops.

#### `[Symbol.asyncIterator](): AsyncIterator<Uint8Array, void>`

The channel can be used as an async iterator:

```ts copy
for await (const msg of channel) {
  // receive messages until channel.close()
}
```

---

## Advanced: Slot Status Internals

<Callout type="info" title="Deep Dive">
  For dashboards, monitoring, or debugging, access per-slot state directly.
</Callout>

- `slotStatus` (readonly Uint8Array[]) — current state for all slots
- `slotClaimTimestamp` (readonly Uint32Array[]) — last claimed timestamp per slot

[How to use for live dashboards →](https://harness.sp8d.com/)

---

## Diagnostics & Observability

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use diagnostics in development and staging to catch protocol issues early.
  Avoid running diagnostics in hot production loops unless you need live
  monitoring.
</Callout>

```ts copy
import { createChannelDiagnostics } from "@sp8d/diagnostics";
const diagnostics = createChannelDiagnostics(channel, 100);
diagnostics.onUpdate((stats) => {
  console.log("SP8D Stats:", stats);
});
diagnostics.start();
```

See the [Diagnostics Guide →](/guides-and-howtos/faqs) for more.

---

## Troubleshooting

<Callout type="warning" title="Gotcha">
  Most issues stem from mismatched buffer sizes, incorrect slot counts, or using
  the wrong concurrency mode. Double-check your channel creation options. Common
  issues are listed below.
</Callout>

### Common Issues & Solutions

- **Problem:** `send` or `trySend` always returns `false` or throws.
  - **Solution:** Ensure the channel is not full. Check `slotSize` and payload size. For async flows, use `sendAsync` with a timeout.
- **Problem:** `recv`/`tryRecv` always returns `null`.
  - **Solution:** The channel is empty. Confirm that producers are sending data and that you are not reading faster than writing.
- **Problem:** `attachChannel` throws or returns an unusable channel.
  - **Solution:** Make sure the `SharedArrayBuffer` is valid and matches the expected structure (slots, slotSize, segments).
- **Problem:** Diagnostics report protocol errors or slot conflicts.
  - **Solution:** Check that all threads use the correct concurrency mode (SPSC, MPSC, MPMC) and that no two producers/consumers are racing in SPSC mode.
- **Problem:** Channel appears to hang or deadlock.
  - **Solution:** Avoid blocking the main thread. Use async methods and ensure all consumers/producers are running. For MPMC, ensure all parties are using unique IDs if required.

---

## Performance & Concurrency Tips

<Callout type="tip" title="Performance Checklist">
  For maximum throughput, tune <code>slots</code> and <code>slotSize</code> to
  match your message rate and payload size. Use the minimal number of segments
  needed for your concurrency model.
</Callout>

- Prefer `trySend`/`tryRecv` in tight loops to avoid blocking.
- Use `sendAsync`/`recvAsync` for backpressure-aware, event-driven flows.
- In high-concurrency scenarios, use the correct mode (`MPSC` or `MPMC`) and avoid sharing producer/consumer IDs.
- Monitor diagnostics in staging to catch contention or reclaim issues before production.
- Avoid frequent `reset()` in production; use it for test harnesses or controlled recovery only.
- For lowest latency, keep `sweepTimeoutMs` low, but not zero—test for your workload.

---

## Related / Next

<Callout type="info" title="Next Steps">
  Explore diagnostics, concurrency patterns, and usage recipes to deepen your
  understanding and optimize your implementation.
</Callout>

- [Channel diagnostics & live overlays →](/guides-and-howtos/faqs)
- [Concurrency patterns and modes →](/principles/concurrency-models)
- [Common usage recipes →](/quickstart/common-recipes)
- [File an issue or contribute →](https://github.com/SP8D/sp8d)

---

**Next: [Go to the SP8D Quickstart Guide →](/quickstart/installation)**

Commit message:

Add new documentation pages and enhance existing content for clarity and SEO
- Create _document.jsx for custom document structure in Next.js
- Add "Protocol Internals" section with architecture overview and slot state machine documentation
- Introduce "Scalable MPMC" example and "Fairness & Backpressure" principles
- Update sitemap.xml with new URLs for better search engine indexing
- Improve existing FAQs and troubleshooting guides for better user guidance

pages/api-reference/channel-api.mdx, after:

---
title: "SP8D Channel API Reference: Lock-Free Messaging for JavaScript & Node.js"
description: "Comprehensive SP8D Channel API reference for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn methods, options, diagnostics, troubleshooting, and best practices for lock-free, real-time, high-performance messaging."
keywords:
  [
    "SP8D API",
    "channel API",
    "JavaScript",
    "Node.js",
    "lock-free messaging",
    "diagnostics",
    "concurrency",
    "high-performance messaging",
  ]
canonical: "https://sp8d.github.io/api-reference/channel-api"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

Access the comprehensive SP8D Channel API reference for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn methods, options, diagnostics, troubleshooting, and best practices for lock-free, real-time, high-performance messaging.

# SP8D Channel API Reference: Lock-Free Messaging for JavaScript & Node.js

> **The `Channel` API is at the heart of SP8D:** It gives you explicit, lock-free, slot-driven control over cross-thread messaging—plus direct access to real-time diagnostics, segmentation, and backpressure handling.

---

## Channel Creation

<Callout type="note" title="Quick intro">
  Create a channel for real-time, lock-free messaging. Use{" "}
  <code>createChannel</code> for new channels, <code>attachChannel</code> to
  connect in another thread.
</Callout>

### `createChannel(options): { channel, buffer }`

Creates a new SP8D channel, returning both the API object and the underlying `SharedArrayBuffer`.

**Options:**

- `slots` _(number, required)_ — Number of slots in the ring buffer.
- `slotSize` _(number, required)_ — Max size (bytes) per payload.
- `mode` _(string: "SPSC" | "MPSC" | "MPMC", optional)_ — Concurrency mode. Default: `"SPSC"`.
- `segments` _(number)_ — Segments for increased scale. Default: `1`.
- `sweepTimeoutMs` _(number)_ — Slot reclaim timeout (ms). Default: `50`.

```ts copy
const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({
  slots: 16,
  slotSize: 64,
  mode: "MPMC",
  segments: 2,
});
```

### `attachChannel(buffer: SharedArrayBuffer): Channel`

#### Use in a second thread/worker to attach to an existing channel’s buffer.

```ts copy
// In a worker thread/process
const channel = attachChannel(buffer);
```

## Channel API: Core Methods

<Callout type="info" title="How to use this section">
  Methods are grouped by intent. Each group starts with a short intro and best
  practices. Scan, deep-dive, or jump to what you need.
</Callout>

---

### Send Data

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use <code>trySend</code> in high-frequency or non-critical paths to avoid
  exceptions. Use <code>send</code> when you must guarantee delivery or want to
  catch errors.
</Callout>

#### `send(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number): boolean`

Enqueue a message. Throws if full or payload too large. Use for critical, must-succeed sends.

#### `trySend(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number): boolean`

Enqueue a message. Returns `false` if full or payload too large—never throws. Use for non-blocking, best-effort sends.

#### `sendAsync(payload: ArrayBufferView, producerId?: number, opts?): Promise<boolean>`

Waits for a slot and sends. Supports timeout and abort. Use for async, backpressure-aware flows.

```ts copy
await channel.sendAsync(msg, myProducerId, { timeoutMs: 1000 });
```

---

### Receive Data

<Callout type="tip" title="Polling vs. Async">
  Use <code>recvAsync</code> for event-driven flows, and <code>tryRecv</code>{" "}
  for polling or non-blocking loops.
</Callout>

#### `recv(): Uint8Array | null`

Synchronous receive. Returns `null` if empty. Use for polling or tight loops.

```ts copy
const next = channel.recv();
if (next) process(next);
```

#### `tryRecv(): Uint8Array | null`

Non-throwing, non-blocking receive. Returns `null` if empty.

```ts copy
const msg = channel.tryRecv();
if (msg) process(msg);
```

#### `recvAsync(): Promise<Uint8Array | null>`

Async receive. Waits for a message. Use for event-driven or awaitable flows.

```ts copy
const msg = await channel.recvAsync();
```

---

### JSON Helpers

<Callout type="warning" title="Gotcha">
  JSON helpers are for quick prototyping. For production, prefer binary
  serialization for performance and size.
</Callout>

#### `sendJSON(obj: object, producerId?: number): boolean`

Send a JSON-serializable object. Throws if full or payload too large.

#### `recvJSON(): object | null`

Receive a JSON-serialized object. Returns `null` if empty or parse fails.

---

### Channel State

<Callout type="tip" title="Status Checks">
  Use <code>full()</code> and <code>empty()</code> to check channel status
  before sending or receiving in tight loops.
</Callout>

#### `full(): boolean`

Returns `true` if the channel is full (no slots available for sending).

#### `empty(): boolean`

Returns `true` if the channel is empty (no slots available for reading).

---

### Lifecycle & Control

<Callout type="warning" title="Shutdown">
  After <code>close()</code>, all send/recv methods will throw or return falsy.
  Use <code>closeAsync</code> for graceful shutdowns in async environments.
</Callout>

#### `close(): void`

Immediately closes the channel and all internal timers. Cleans up, resets all state. After `close()`, send/recv throw or return falsy.

#### `closeAsync(): Promise<void>`

Gracefully closes the channel and waits for all background tasks to stop.

```ts copy
await channel.closeAsync();
```

#### `reset(): void`

Resets the channel to its initial state (empties all slots, resets counters). Does not reallocate the buffer.

```ts copy
channel.reset();
```

---

### Diagnostics & Introspection

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use <code>stats()</code> and <code>info()</code> for live monitoring and
  debugging. Use <code>validate()</code> in tests to catch protocol errors
  early.
</Callout>

<Callout type="info" title="Advanced: Async Iteration">
  The channel can be used as an async iterator for idiomatic, event-driven
  message consumption.
</Callout>

#### `stats(): ChannelStats`

Returns a snapshot object of channel usage and health metrics.

- `slots` — total slots
- `used` — slots in use
- `free` — slots available
- `errors, conflicts, reclaimed` — counts of errors, producer/consumer collisions, and recovery sweeps

#### `info(): string`

Returns a human-readable string of the channel’s configuration (mode, size, segments).

#### `validate(): void`

Checks protocol invariants—throws if any slot is in an illegal state. Use in development/testing, not hot production loops.

#### `[Symbol.asyncIterator](): AsyncIterator<Uint8Array, void>`

The channel can be used as an async iterator:

```ts copy
for await (const msg of channel) {
  // receive messages until channel.close()
}
```

---

## Advanced: Slot Status Internals

For a comprehensive explanation of protocol architecture, slot state machine, and workflow—including diagrams and edge cases—see the [Architecture Overview →](/protocol-internals/architecture-overview#key-components).

<Callout type="info" title="Deep Dive">
  For dashboards, monitoring, or debugging, access per-slot state directly.
</Callout>

- `slotStatus` (readonly Uint8Array[]) — current state for all slots
- `slotClaimTimestamp` (readonly Uint32Array[]) — last claimed timestamp per slot

[How to use for live dashboards →](https://harness.sp8d.com/)

---

## Diagnostics & Observability

<Callout type="tip" title="Best Practice">
  Use diagnostics in development and staging to catch protocol issues early.
  Avoid running diagnostics in hot production loops unless you need live
  monitoring.
</Callout>

```ts copy
import { createChannelDiagnostics } from "@sp8d/diagnostics";
const diagnostics = createChannelDiagnostics(channel, 100);
diagnostics.onUpdate((stats) => {
  console.log("SP8D Stats:", stats);
});
diagnostics.start();
```

See the [Diagnostics Guide →](/guides-and-howtos/faqs) for more.

---

## Troubleshooting

<Callout type="warning" title="Gotcha">
  Most issues stem from mismatched buffer sizes, incorrect slot counts, or using
  the wrong concurrency mode. Double-check your channel creation options. Common
  issues are listed below.
</Callout>

### Common Issues & Solutions

- **Problem:** `send` or `trySend` always returns `false` or throws.
  - **Solution:** Ensure the channel is not full. Check `slotSize` and payload size. For async flows, use `sendAsync` with a timeout.
- **Problem:** `recv`/`tryRecv` always returns `null`.
  - **Solution:** The channel is empty. Confirm that producers are sending data and that you are not reading faster than writing.
- **Problem:** `attachChannel` throws or returns an unusable channel.
  - **Solution:** Make sure the `SharedArrayBuffer` is valid and matches the expected structure (slots, slotSize, segments).
- **Problem:** Diagnostics report protocol errors or slot conflicts.
  - **Solution:** Check that all threads use the correct concurrency mode (SPSC, MPSC, MPMC) and that no two producers/consumers are racing in SPSC mode.
- **Problem:** Channel appears to hang or deadlock.
  - **Solution:** Avoid blocking the main thread. Use async methods and ensure all consumers/producers are running. For MPMC, ensure all parties are using unique IDs if required.

---

## Performance & Concurrency Tips

<Callout type="tip" title="Performance Checklist">
  For maximum throughput, tune <code>slots</code> and <code>slotSize</code> to
  match your message rate and payload size. Use the minimal number of segments
  needed for your concurrency model.
</Callout>

- Prefer `trySend`/`tryRecv` in tight loops to avoid blocking.
- Use `sendAsync`/`recvAsync` for backpressure-aware, event-driven flows.
- In high-concurrency scenarios, use the correct mode (`MPSC` or `MPMC`) and avoid sharing producer/consumer IDs.
- Monitor diagnostics in staging to catch contention or reclaim issues before production.
- Avoid frequent `reset()` in production; use it for test harnesses or controlled recovery only.
- For lowest latency, keep `sweepTimeoutMs` low, but not zero—test for your workload.

---

## Where to Go Next

- [Architecture Overview](/protocol-internals/architecture-overview#key-components): Canonical protocol architecture, slot state machine, and workflow.
- [Concurrency Models](/principles/concurrency-models): SPSC, MPSC, MPMC patterns and best practices.
- [Common Usage Recipes](/quickstart/common-recipes): Integration patterns and real-world examples.
- [FAQ & Diagnostics](/guides-and-howtos/faqs): Troubleshooting, diagnostics, and live overlays.
- [Quickstart Guide](/quickstart/installation): Install and get started fast.
- [File an issue or contribute](https://github.com/SP8D/sp8d): Open source contributions welcome.

---

**Next: [Go to the SP8D Quickstart Guide →](/quickstart/installation)**
