pages/quickstart/common-recipes.mdx, before:

---
title: "Quickstart: Common Recipes"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# Quickstart: Common Recipes

Unlock SP8D’s superpowers: copy-paste these patterns to integrate channels across workers, threads, AI loops, and dashboards. Each recipe below is ready to use and includes a visual or explanation to help you understand the data flow and integration points.

---

## In a Browser (Main Thread to Worker)

This pattern enables high-performance, zero-copy communication between your main thread and a Web Worker.

<Callout type="warning" title="Requirements">
  Requires SharedArrayBuffer support in your browser.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    Worker[Web Worker]
    Channel[SP8D Channel]
    Main -- createChannel & send buffer --> Channel
    Main -- postMessage(buffer) --> Worker
    Worker -- attachChannel(buffer) --> Channel
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    Worker -- recv() --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread creates the channel and buffer, transfers it to the worker,
  and both communicate through the shared channel.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="main.ts"
import { createChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({ slots: 16, slotSize: 32 });
const worker = new Worker("worker.js");
worker.postMessage(buffer, [buffer]);
channel.send(new Uint8Array([99, 100, 101]));
```

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="worker.ts"
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

self.onmessage = (e: MessageEvent<SharedArrayBuffer>) => {
  const channel = attachChannel(e.data);
  const msg = channel.recv();
  console.log("Worker received:", msg); // Uint8Array([99, 100, 101])
};
```

---

## Node.js with worker_threads

This recipe shows how to use SP8D for fast, lock-free communication between Node.js worker threads.

<Callout type="warning" title="Requirements">
  Requires Node.js 18+ and <code>worker_threads</code>.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    Worker[Node.js Worker]
    Channel["SP8D Channel (SharedArrayBuffer)"]
    Main -- createChannel & pass buffer --> Channel
    Main -- workerData(buffer) --> Worker
    Worker -- attachChannel(buffer) --> Channel
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    Worker -- recv() --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread creates the channel and buffer, passes it to the worker, and
  both communicate through the shared channel.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="main.ts"
import { createChannel } from "@sp8d/core";
import { Worker } from "worker_threads";

const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({ slots: 32, slotSize: 32 });
const worker = new Worker("./worker.js", { workerData: buffer });
channel.send(new Uint8Array([123]));
```

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="worker.ts"
import { workerData } from "worker_threads";
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

const channel = attachChannel(workerData);
const msg = channel.recv();
console.log("Worker received:", msg); // Uint8Array([123])
```

---

## Multiplexing: Multiple Producers, One or Many Consumers

This pattern enables scalable, concurrent communication by using segments or multiple channels. Each producer/consumer pair can be in its own worker.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Producers
      P1[Producer 1]
      P2[Producer 2]
      Pn[...]
    end
    subgraph Consumers
      C1[Consumer 1]
      C2[Consumer 2]
      Cn[...]
    end
    Channel[SP8D Channel - Segmented]
    P1 -- send --> Channel
    P2 -- send --> Channel
    Pn -- send --> Channel
    Channel -- recv --> C1
    Channel -- recv --> C2
    Channel -- recv --> Cn
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  Each producer and consumer can operate in its own thread or worker, mapped to
  segments for fair sharing and reduced contention.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers
// In each producer thread:
channel.send(new Uint8Array([myProducerId]));

// In each consumer thread:
while (true) {
  const msg = channel.recv();
  if (msg) process(msg);
}
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Tip: Fair Sharing & Contention">
  For fair sharing and less contention, map producer/consumer IDs to segments
  using <code>(id % segments)</code> when creating the channel.
</Callout>

---

## Integrating with ML or AI Model Workers

This recipe demonstrates how to use SP8D for efficient, async message passing to and from ML/AI model workers.

<Callout type="info" title="Custom Model Integration">
  Replace <code>runMyMLModel</code> with your own model inference function.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    AIWorker[AI/ML Worker]
    Channel[SP8D Channel]
    AIModel[AI Model]
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    AIWorker -- recvAsync() --> Channel
    AIWorker -- process(msg) --> AIModel
    AIWorker -- (optional: send result) --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread sends data to the worker, which processes it (e.g., with an ML
  model) and can optionally send results back.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="ai-worker.ts"
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

let channel;
self.onmessage = (e) => {
  channel = attachChannel(e.data);
};

async function processMessages() {
  while (true) {
    const msg = await channel.recvAsync(); // waits for a message
    const result = await runMyMLModel(msg); // user-defined
    // Optionally, send result back via another channel
  }
}
processMessages();
```

---

## Using Diagnostics & Stats

Monitor health and performance in real time with SP8D diagnostics.

```ts copy showLineNumbers
import { createChannel, createChannelDiagnostics } from "@sp8d/core";

const { channel } = createChannel({ slots: 16, slotSize: 64 });
const diagnostics = createChannelDiagnostics(channel, 100);

diagnostics.onUpdate((stats) => {
  console.log("SP8D Stats:", stats);
});
diagnostics.start();
```

<Callout type="info" title="Stats Explained">
  Stats include: <code>.used</code> (msgs in flight), <code>.throughput</code>{" "}
  (msgs/sec), <code>.consumerLag</code>, <code>.errors</code>,{" "}
  <code>.conflicts</code>, <code>.reclaimed</code>.
</Callout>

---

## Handling Backpressure (Full Buffer)

This pattern shows how to handle cases where the buffer is full and the producer must wait or retry.

<Callout type="warning" title="Backpressure Handling">
  If the buffer is full, the producer must wait, retry, or drop messages as
  appropriate for your workload.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers
// Producer waits if buffer is full
const payload = createPayload();
while (!channel.send(payload)) {
  // Buffer is full, wait a bit or drop/log as needed
  await new Promise((r) => setTimeout(r, 1));
}
```

---

## Next Steps

Explore the API reference, diagnostics, and advanced usage guides for deeper
integration and troubleshooting.

- [Core API Reference →](/api-reference/channel-api)
- [Diagnostics and Live Dashboard Overlay →](/guides-and-howtos/faqs)
- [FAQ: “How do I broadcast? What about MPMC?” →](/guides-and-howtos/faqs)
- Have a recipe to share or a tricky integration question? [Open an Issue or Suggest Edits →](https://github.com/SP8D/sp8d/issues)

Commit message:

Enhance documentation: update titles, descriptions, and keywords across multiple pages; add sitemap and robots.txt for better SEO

pages/quickstart/common-recipes.mdx, after:

---
title: "SP8D Recipes: Integration Patterns for JavaScript & Node.js"
description: "Common SP8D integration patterns and recipes for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn browser, Node.js, and AI/ML workflows with code samples and diagrams for high-performance messaging."
keywords:
  [
    "SP8D recipes",
    "integration patterns",
    "JavaScript",
    "Node.js",
    "AI messaging",
    "browser workers",
    "concurrency",
    "high-performance messaging",
  ]
canonical: "https://sp8d.github.io/quickstart/common-recipes"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# Quickstart: Common Recipes

Unlock SP8D’s power with common integration patterns and recipes for JavaScript and Node.js. Learn browser, Node.js, and AI/ML workflows with code samples and diagrams for high-performance messaging.

# SP8D Recipes: Integration Patterns for JavaScript & Node.js

Unlock SP8D’s superpowers: copy-paste these patterns to integrate channels across workers, threads, AI loops, and dashboards. Each recipe below is ready to use and includes a visual or explanation to help you understand the data flow and integration points.

---

## In a Browser (Main Thread to Worker)

This pattern enables high-performance, zero-copy communication between your main thread and a Web Worker.

<Callout type="warning" title="Requirements">
  Requires SharedArrayBuffer support in your browser.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    Worker[Web Worker]
    Channel[SP8D Channel]
    Main -- createChannel & send buffer --> Channel
    Main -- postMessage(buffer) --> Worker
    Worker -- attachChannel(buffer) --> Channel
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    Worker -- recv() --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread creates the channel and buffer, transfers it to the worker,
  and both communicate through the shared channel.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="main.ts"
import { createChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({ slots: 16, slotSize: 32 });
const worker = new Worker("worker.js");
worker.postMessage(buffer, [buffer]);
channel.send(new Uint8Array([99, 100, 101]));
```

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="worker.ts"
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

self.onmessage = (e: MessageEvent<SharedArrayBuffer>) => {
  const channel = attachChannel(e.data);
  const msg = channel.recv();
  console.log("Worker received:", msg); // Uint8Array([99, 100, 101])
};
```

---

## Node.js with worker_threads

This recipe shows how to use SP8D for fast, lock-free communication between Node.js worker threads.

<Callout type="warning" title="Requirements">
  Requires Node.js 18+ and <code>worker_threads</code>.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    Worker[Node.js Worker]
    Channel["SP8D Channel (SharedArrayBuffer)"]
    Main -- createChannel & pass buffer --> Channel
    Main -- workerData(buffer) --> Worker
    Worker -- attachChannel(buffer) --> Channel
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    Worker -- recv() --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread creates the channel and buffer, passes it to the worker, and
  both communicate through the shared channel.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="main.ts"
import { createChannel } from "@sp8d/core";
import { Worker } from "worker_threads";

const { channel, buffer } = createChannel({ slots: 32, slotSize: 32 });
const worker = new Worker("./worker.js", { workerData: buffer });
channel.send(new Uint8Array([123]));
```

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="worker.ts"
import { workerData } from "worker_threads";
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

const channel = attachChannel(workerData);
const msg = channel.recv();
console.log("Worker received:", msg); // Uint8Array([123])
```

---

## Multiplexing: Multiple Producers, One or Many Consumers

This pattern enables scalable, concurrent communication by using segments or multiple channels. Each producer/consumer pair can be in its own worker.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Producers
      P1[Producer 1]
      P2[Producer 2]
      Pn[...]
    end
    subgraph Consumers
      C1[Consumer 1]
      C2[Consumer 2]
      Cn[...]
    end
    Channel[SP8D Channel - Segmented]
    P1 -- send --> Channel
    P2 -- send --> Channel
    Pn -- send --> Channel
    Channel -- recv --> C1
    Channel -- recv --> C2
    Channel -- recv --> Cn
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  Each producer and consumer can operate in its own thread or worker, mapped to
  segments for fair sharing and reduced contention.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers
// In each producer thread:
channel.send(new Uint8Array([myProducerId]));

// In each consumer thread:
while (true) {
  const msg = channel.recv();
  if (msg) process(msg);
}
```

<Callout type="tip" title="Tip: Fair Sharing & Contention">
  For fair sharing and less contention, map producer/consumer IDs to segments
  using <code>(id % segments)</code> when creating the channel.
</Callout>

---

## Integrating with ML or AI Model Workers

This recipe demonstrates how to use SP8D for efficient, async message passing to and from ML/AI model workers.

<Callout type="info" title="Custom Model Integration">
  Replace <code>runMyMLModel</code> with your own model inference function.
</Callout>

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Main[Main Thread]
    AIWorker[AI/ML Worker]
    Channel[SP8D Channel]
    AIModel[AI Model]
    Main -- send(msg) --> Channel
    AIWorker -- recvAsync() --> Channel
    AIWorker -- process(msg) --> AIModel
    AIWorker -- (optional: send result) --> Channel
```

<Callout type="info" title="Data Flow">
  The main thread sends data to the worker, which processes it (e.g., with an ML
  model) and can optionally send results back.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers filename="ai-worker.ts"
import { attachChannel } from "@sp8d/core";

let channel;
self.onmessage = (e) => {
  channel = attachChannel(e.data);
};

async function processMessages() {
  while (true) {
    const msg = await channel.recvAsync(); // waits for a message
    const result = await runMyMLModel(msg); // user-defined
    // Optionally, send result back via another channel
  }
}
processMessages();
```

---

## Using Diagnostics & Stats

Monitor health and performance in real time with SP8D diagnostics.

```ts copy showLineNumbers
import { createChannel, createChannelDiagnostics } from "@sp8d/core";

const { channel } = createChannel({ slots: 16, slotSize: 64 });
const diagnostics = createChannelDiagnostics(channel, 100);

diagnostics.onUpdate((stats) => {
  console.log("SP8D Stats:", stats);
});
diagnostics.start();
```

<Callout type="info" title="Stats Explained">
  Stats include: <code>.used</code> (msgs in flight), <code>.throughput</code>{" "}
  (msgs/sec), <code>.consumerLag</code>, <code>.errors</code>,{" "}
  <code>.conflicts</code>, <code>.reclaimed</code>.
</Callout>

---

## Handling Backpressure (Full Buffer)

This pattern shows how to handle cases where the buffer is full and the producer must wait or retry.

<Callout type="warning" title="Backpressure Handling">
  If the buffer is full, the producer must wait, retry, or drop messages as
  appropriate for your workload.
</Callout>

```ts copy showLineNumbers
// Producer waits if buffer is full
const payload = createPayload();
while (!channel.send(payload)) {
  // Buffer is full, wait a bit or drop/log as needed
  await new Promise((r) => setTimeout(r, 1));
}
```

---

_Last updated: 14 May 2025_

---

**Next: [Read the SP8D Channel API Reference →](/api-reference/channel-api)**
