pages/guides-and-howtos/troubleshooting.mdx, before:

---
title: "SP8D Troubleshooting Guide: Buffer Full, Starvation, Diagnostics"
description: "In-depth troubleshooting for SP8D: persistent buffer full, starvation, unfair access, and advanced diagnostics. Step-by-step solutions for JavaScript & Node.js."
keywords:
  [
    "SP8D troubleshooting",
    "buffer full",
    "starvation",
    "diagnostics",
    "fairness",
    "JavaScript",
    "Node.js",
    "concurrency",
    "high-performance messaging",
  ]
canonical: "https://sp8d.github.io/guides-and-howtos/troubleshooting"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# SP8D Troubleshooting Guide

<Callout type="info" title="How to Use This Guide">
  This guide covers persistent buffer full, starvation, unfair access, and
  advanced diagnostics for SP8D channels. Use the scenarios below to quickly
  diagnose and resolve common issues.
</Callout>

---

## Troubleshooting Scenarios

### Persistent Buffer Full

- Check if your consumer is too slow or your buffer is too small.
- Use diagnostics to identify bottlenecks.
- Try increasing buffer size or optimizing consumer logic.

### Starvation or Unfair Access

- Use diagnostics to check for agents that are not making progress.
- Review your concurrency pattern—consider switching to SPSC or MPSC if possible.
- Tune buffer size and retry logic.

---

## Advanced Diagnostics & Mythbusting

- _Myth:_ “Backpressure means data loss.”  
  _Fact:_ SP8D never drops data silently; you always get a signal and can handle it.
- _Myth:_ “Fairness is automatic in all lock-free systems.”  
  _Fact:_ Only protocols with explicit fairness mechanisms (like SP8D’s slot state machine) can guarantee it.
- _Myth:_ “Backpressure only happens in slow systems.”  
  _Fact:_ Backpressure can occur even in high-performance systems during bursts or imbalanced workloads.
- _Myth:_ “Diagnostics are only for debugging.”  
  _Fact:_ Diagnostics are essential for proactive monitoring and tuning in production.

---

## Where to Go Next

- [Common Recipes](/quickstart/common-recipes)
- [Channel API Reference](/api-reference/channel-api)
- [Protocol Architecture Overview](/protocol-internals/architecture-overview)
- [Fairness & Backpressure](/principles/fairness-backpressure)
- [FAQ & Troubleshooting](/guides-and-howtos/faqs)

Commit message:

Refactor documentation for clarity and consistency: update callout types, enhance descriptions, and improve sitemap links for better navigation and user experience.

pages/guides-and-howtos/troubleshooting.mdx, after:

---
title: "SP8D Troubleshooting Guide: Buffer Full, Starvation, Diagnostics"
description: "In-depth troubleshooting for SP8D: persistent buffer full, starvation, unfair access, and advanced diagnostics. Step-by-step solutions for JavaScript & Node.js."
keywords:
  [
    "SP8D troubleshooting",
    "buffer full",
    "starvation",
    "diagnostics",
    "fairness",
    "JavaScript",
    "Node.js",
    "concurrency",
    "high-performance messaging",
  ]
canonical: "https://sp8d.github.io/guides-and-howtos/troubleshooting"
---

import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# SP8D Troubleshooting Guide

<Callout type="info" title="How to Use This Guide">
  This guide covers persistent buffer full, starvation, unfair access, and
  advanced diagnostics for SP8D channels. Use the scenarios below to quickly
  diagnose and resolve common issues.
</Callout>

---

## Troubleshooting Scenarios

### Persistent Buffer Full

- Check if your consumer is too slow or your buffer is too small.
- Use diagnostics to identify bottlenecks.
- Try increasing buffer size or optimizing consumer logic.

### Starvation or Unfair Access

- Use diagnostics to check for agents that are not making progress.
- Review your concurrency pattern—consider switching to SPSC or MPSC if possible.
- Tune buffer size and retry logic.

---

## Slot State Machine Issues

For a complete guide to slot state machine internals—including slot lifecycle, state transitions, fairness, and recovery—see the [Slot State Machine](/protocol-internals/slot-state-machine#troubleshooting--debugging-checklist) documentation.

---

## Advanced Diagnostics & Mythbusting

- _Myth:_ “Backpressure means data loss.”  
  _Fact:_ SP8D never drops data silently; you always get a signal and can handle it.
- _Myth:_ “Fairness is automatic in all lock-free systems.”  
  _Fact:_ Only protocols with explicit fairness mechanisms (like SP8D’s slot state machine) can guarantee it.
- _Myth:_ “Backpressure only happens in slow systems.”  
  _Fact:_ Backpressure can occur even in high-performance systems during bursts or imbalanced workloads.
- _Myth:_ “Diagnostics are only for debugging.”  
  _Fact:_ Diagnostics are essential for proactive monitoring and tuning in production.

---

## Where to Go Next

- [Common Recipes](/quickstart/common-recipes)
- [Channel API Reference](/api-reference/channel-api)
- [Protocol Architecture Overview](/protocol-internals/architecture-overview)
- [Fairness & Backpressure](/principles/fairness-backpressure)
- [FAQ & Troubleshooting](/guides-and-howtos/faqs)
